# Type declarations

## Type declaration

Type declarations can be added to function arguments, return values, and, as of PHP 7.4.0, class properties. They ensure that the value is of the specified type at call time, otherwise a TypeError is thrown. 

``` php
public function updateUser(School $school) {
	
}
```

In the example above you can see that a variable has been passed into the function. But it has has a Type Declaration assigned. This is called Type declaration, it ensures that this variables is of a particular type. In this intance School $school is of type class/object and must of that type.

## Return type declaration

The return type declaration is an exmaple of ensuring a function returns the desired outcome.


```php
class C {}

function getC(): C {
    return new C;
}

$var = getC();

var_dump($var);

//output
object(C)#1 (0) {
}
```

This is commonly used in MVC framworks. For example, you have a base class that handles the http request cycle. So your function handles some basic logic and needs to return a response. Therefore, the framework already has a class/controller to handle the resonse so lets use it. Here is an example from Symfony.

```php
use Symfony\Component\HttpFoundation\Response;

public function index(): Response
{
    // here would be some logic
    
    return $this->render(...);
}
``` 


## Both together

In this example, you will see the use of type declaration and return type declaration. Here we will use another simple Symfony example. The Symfony component classes being added to this page return two obejects. The Request and the response. Each object has a number of useful functions that are made avalibale to the user to help with the http cycle and are also useful for logic within the function. 

First the Request object is passed into the function as a parameter with **Type Declaration** this is now made avalibale to the function to be used. You will also see that the **Return Type Declaration** has been added to the end of the function line. Therefore, ensuring that this function returns a Response Object.

```php
use Symfony\Component\HttpFoundation\Request;
use Symfony\Component\HttpFoundation\Response;
// ...

public function index(Request $request, string $firstName, string $lastName): Response
{
    $page = $request->query->get('page', 1);

    // ...
}
```

Here are the links to the php.net reference page for this...

[https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.types.declarations.php]